Migration guide draft (#3120)
diesel-rs/diesel: guide_drafts/migration_guide.md

# Diesel 2.0 Migration guide

> Diesel 2.0 changes large parts of the internal implementation of diesel. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diesel 2.0 introduces substantial changes to Diesel's inner workings. 
```

In some cases this impacts code written using Diesel 1.4.x. 
This document outlines notable changes and presents potential update strategies. 
We recommend to start the upgrade by removing the usage of all items that 

> are deprecated on Diesel 1.4.x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are marked as deprecated in Diesel 1.4.x.
```

> We expect that not all users are effected equally by different required changes. 

Reviewer: I am not sure this lines is necessary, especially since the wording of the next one specifically states that "your mileage may vary", basically

Any code base using migrating to Diesel 2.0 is expected to be affected at least by 

> the following changes:

Reviewer: "The following changes are guaranteed to be affecting all of the users intending to migrate to Diesel 2.0:" ❔

* [Diesel requires now a mutable connetion type](2-0-0-mutable-connection)
* [Changed derive attributes](2-0-0-derive-attributes)

> Any users of `diesel_migration` are additionally affected by the following change:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users of `diesel_migration` are additionally affected by the following change:
```

* [`diesel_migration` rewrite](2-0-0-upgrade-migrations)

> Any user of `BoxableExpression` might be affected by the following change:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users of `BoxableExpression` might be affected by the following change:
```

* [Changed nullability of operators](2-0-0-nullability-ops)

> Any users that implement support for their SQL types or type mappings are affected 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users that implement support for their SQL types or type mappings are affected 
```

by the following changes:

* [Changed required traits for custom SQL types](2-0-0-custom-type-implementation)
* [Changed `ToSql` implementations](2-0-0-to-sql)
* [Changed `FromSql` implementations](2-0-0-from-sql)

> Any user that used the `no_arg_sql_function!` macro might want to replace their usage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`no_arg_sql_function!` macro is now pending deprecation.
Users of the macro are advised to consider `sql_function!` macro.
```

* [Deprecated usage of `no_arg_sql_function!` macro](2-0-0-no_arg_sql_function)

> Users that update generic diesel code will also be affected by the following changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users that update generic Diesel code will also be affected by the following changes:
```

* [Removing `NonAggregate` in favor of `ValidGrouping`](2-0-0-upgrade-non-aggregate)
* [Changed generic bounds](2-0-0-generic-changes)

Additionally this release contains many changes for users that implemented a custom backend/connection.

> We do not provide explicit migration steps there, but we encourage users to reach out for questions there. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do not provide explicit migration steps but we encourage users to reach out with questions pertaining to these changes. 
```

## Mutable Connections required
<a name="2-0-0-mutable-connection"></a>

Diesel now requires mutable access to the `Connection` to perform any database interaction. The following changes

> are required for all usages of a `Connection` type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are required for all usages of the `Connection` type:
```

```diff
- let connection = PgConnection::establish_connection("…")?;
- let result = some_query.load(&connection)?;
+ let mut connection = PgConnection::establish_connection("…")?;
+ let result = some_query.load(&mut connection)?;
```

> We expect that this is a straightforward change as there connection already can execute only one query at the time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect this to be a straightforward change as the connection can already execute only one query at a time.
```

## Derive attributes
<a name="2-0-0-derive-attributes"></a>

> We have updated all of our diesel derive attributes to follow the patterns that are used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have updated all of our Diesel derive attributes to follow the patterns that are used
```

> widely in the rust ecosystem. This means that all of them need to be wrapped by `#[diesel()]` now. And you can specify multiple attributes on the same line now separated by `,`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
widely in the Rust's ecosystem. This means that all of them need to be wrapped by `#[diesel()]` now.  You can now specify multiple attributes on the same line using `,` separator.
```

This is backward compatible and thus all of your old attributes will still work, but with
warnings. The attributes can be upgraded by either looking at the warnings or by reading
diesel derive documentation reference.

## `diesel_migration` rewrite
<a name = "2-0-0-upgrade-migrations"></a>

> We have completely rewritten the `diesel_migration` crate. As part of this rewrite all 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have completely rewritten the `diesel_migration` crate. As a part of this rewrite all 
```

free standing functions are removed from `diesel_migration`. Equivalent functionality 
is now provided by the `MigrationHarness` trait, which is implemented for any `Connection` 

> type and for `HarnessWithOutput`. Checkout their documentation for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type and for `HarnessWithOutput`. Refer to their documentations for details.
```

> Additionally this rewrite changed the way we provide migrations. Instead of having a own implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, this rewrite changed the way we provide migrations. Instead of having our own implementation
```

form a specific directory
* `EmbeddedMigrations`, which mirrors the existing `embed_migrations!` macro. 

Finally the `embed_migrations!()` macro itself changed. Instead of generating a magical embedded module 
it now generates an instance of `EmbeddedMigrations`, that could be stored in a constant for example.

That means code using `embed_migrations!()` needs to be changed from
```rust
embed_migrations!()

fn run_migration(conn: &PgConnection) {
    embedded_migrations::run(conn).unwrap()
}
```
to 
```rust
pub const MIGRATIONS: EmbeddedMigrations = embed_migrations!();

fn run_migration(conn: &PgConnection) {
    conn.run_pending_migrations(MIGRATIONS).unwrap();
}
```

## Changed nullability of operators
<a name="2-0-0-nullability-ops"></a>

We changed the way how we handle the propagation of null values through binary operators. Diesel 1.x always assumed 
that the result of a binary operation `value_a > value_b` is not nullable, which does not match the behaviour of the 
underlying databases. `value_a > null` may return a `NULL` value there. With Diesel 2.0 we changed this to match more

> closely the behaviour of the underlying databases. We expect that this change has the biggest impact on existing usages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
closely the behaviour of the underlying databases. We expect this change to have the biggest impact on existing usages
```

> of `BoxableExpression` as it may change the resulting sql type there. As possibly workaround for divering sql types 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of `BoxableExpression` as it may change the resulting sql type there. As a possible workaround for divering sql types 
```

there we recommend to use one of the following functions:

* `NullableExpressionMethods::nullable()`
* `NullableExpressionMethods::assume_not_nullable()`

## Custom SQL type implementations
<a name="2-0-0-custom-type-implementation"></a>

We changed how we mark sql types as nullable at type level. For this we replaced the `NonNull` trait with a 
more generic `SqlType` trait, which allows to mark a sql type as (non-) nullable. This may affect custom
sql type implementations.

Users that already use the existing `#[derive(SqlType)]` do not need to change any code. The derive internally
generates the correct code after the update. Users that use a manual implementation of `NonNull` need to replace
it with a corresponding `SqlType` implementation:

```diff
- impl NonNull for MyCustomSqlType {}
+ impl SqlType for MyCustomSqlType {
+     type IsNull = diesel::sql_types::is_nullable::NotNull;
+ }
```

> Additionally the diesel CLI tool was changed so that it automatically generates the rust side definition of custom SQL types 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally the diesel CLI tool was changed so that it automatically generates the Rust side definition of custom SQL types 
```

as long as they appear on any table. This feature currently only supports the PostgreSQL backend, as all other supported backends
do not support real custom types at SQL level at all.

## Changed `ToSql` implementations

> We restructured the way diesel serializes rust values to their backend specific representation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We restructured the way Diesel serializes Rust values to their backend specific representation.
```

This enables us to skip copying the value at all if the specific backend supports writing to a 
shared buffer. Unfortunately, this feature requires changes to the `ToSql` trait. This change introduces
a lifetime that ensures that a value implementing `ToSql` outlives the underlying serialisation buffer.
Additionally we separated the output buffer type for Sqlite from the type used for PostgreSQL and Mysql.

This has the implication that for generic implementations using a inner existing `ToSql` implementation you cannot
create temporary values anymore and forward them to the inner implementation.

> For backend concrete implementations there are the following functions avaible to workaround this limitation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For backend concrete implementations, the following functions allow to work around this limitation:
```

* `Output::reborrow()` for the `Pg` and `Mysql` backend

> * `Output::set_value()` for the `Sqlite` backend (Checkout the documentation of `SqliteBindValue` for accepted values)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Output::set_value()` for the `Sqlite` backend (Refer to the documentation of `SqliteBindValue` for accepted values)
```

## Changed `FromSql` implementations
<a name="2-0-0-from-sql"></a>

> We changed the raw value representation for both, the postgres and mysql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We changed the raw value representation for both PostgreSQL and MySQL
```

> backend, from a `& [u8]` to an opaque type. This allows us to include additional information like the database side

Reviewer: ```suggestion
backends, from a `& [u8]` to an opaque type. This allows us to include additional information like the database side
```

> type there. This change enables users to write `FromSql` implementations that decide dynamically which kind of value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type there. This change enables users to write `FromSql` implementations that decide dynamically what kind of value
```

was received. The new value types for both backends expose a `as_bytes()` method to access the underlying byte buffer.

Any affected backend needs to perform the following changes:

```diff
impl<DB: Backend> FromSql<YourSqlType, DB> for YourType {
-    fn from_sql(bytes: &[u8]) -> deserialize::Result<Self> {
+    fn from_sql(value: backend::RawValue<DB>) -> deserialize::Result<Self> {
+        let bytes = value.as_bytes();
         // …
     }
}
```

## `no_arg_sql_function`
<a name="2-0-0-no_arg_sql_function"></a>

The `no_arg_sql_function` was deprecated without direct replacement. At the same time the
`sql_function!` macro gained support for sql functions without argument. This support generates slightly 
different code. Instead of representing the sql function as zero sized struct, `sql_function!` will generate an ordinary function call without arguments. This requires changing any usage of the generated dsl. This change 

> affects any usage of `no_arg_sql_function!` in third party crates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
affects all of the usages of the `no_arg_sql_function!` in third party crates.
```

```diff
- no_arg_sql_function!(now, sql_types::Timestamp, "Represents the SQL NOW() function");
- 
- diesel::select(now)
 
+ sql_function!{
+     /// Represents the SQL NOW() function
+     fn now() -> sql_types::Timestamp;
+ }
+
+ diesel::select(now())
```

### Replacement of `NonAggregate` with `ValidGrouping`
<a name="2-0-0-upgrade-non-aggregate"></a>

> Diesel does now fully enforce aggregation rules, which required us to change the way we represent aggregation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diesel now fully enforces the aggregation rules, which required us to change the way we represent the aggregation 
```

> at the type system level. This is used to provide `group_by` support. Diesels aggregation rules 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at the type system level. This is used to provide `group_by` support. Diesel's aggregation rules 
```

> match the semantics of PostgreSQL or Mysql with the `ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY` option enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
match the semantics of PostgreSQL or MySQL with the `ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY` option enabled.
```

> As part of this change we removed the `NonAggregate` trait in favor of a new more expressive `ValidGrouping`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of this change we removed the `NonAggregate` trait in favor of a new, more expressive `ValidGrouping`
```

trait. Existing implementations of `NonAggregate` must be replaced with an equivalent `ValidGrouping` implementation.

The following change shows how to replace an existing implementation with a strictly equivalent implementation.
```diff
- impl NonAggregate for MyQueryNode {}
+ impl ValidGrouping<()> for MyQueryNode {
+    type IsAggregate = is_aggregate::No;
+ }
```
Additional changes may be required to adapt custom query ast implementations to fully support `group_by` clauses. 

> Checkout the documentation of `ValidGrouping` for details there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the documentation of `ValidGrouping` for details.
```

> In addition any occurrence of `NonAggregate` in trait bounds needs to be replaced. Again the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, any occurrence of `NonAggregate` in trait bounds needs to be replaced. Again, the following
```

change shows the strictly equivalent version:

```diff
 where
-     T: NonAggregate,
+     T: ValidGrouping<()>,
+     T::IsAggregate: MixedGrouping<is_aggregate::No, Output = is_aggregate::No>,
+     is_aggregate::No: MixedGrouping<T::IsAggregate, Output = is_aggregate::No>,
```

## Other changes to generics
<a name="2-0-0-generic-changes">

> In addition to the changes listed above, we changed numerous internal details of diesel. This will have impacts on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the changes listed above, we changed numerous internal details of Diesel. This will have impact on
```

> most people that wrote non trivial generic code abstracting over diesel. This section tries to list as much of those

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most codebases that include non-trivial generic code abstracting over Diesel. This section tries to list as much of those
```

changes as possible

### Removed most of the non-public reachable API

With Diesel 2.0 we removed most of the API which was marked with `#[doc(hidden)]`. Technically these parts of the API 

> have always been private to diesel. This change enforces this distinction a in a stricter way. In addition some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have always been private to Diesel. This change enforces this distinction in stricter way. In addition, some
```

parts of these formerly hidden API are now documented and exposed behind the
`i-implement-a-third-party-backend-and-opt-into-breaking-changes` crate feature. As the name already implies 

> we reserve the right to change these API's between different diesel 2.x minor releases, so you should always specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we reserve the right to change these APIs between different Diesel 2.x minor releases, so you should always pin
```

> a concrete minor release version if you use these API's.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a concrete minor release version if you use these APIs.
```

If you depended on such an API and you cannot find a suitable replacement we invite you to work with us on exposing the corresponding 
feature as part of the stable API.

### Changed structure of the deserialization traits

We changed the internal structure of the `FromSqlRow`, `Queryable` and `QueryableByName` trait family used for deserialization. This change allows us to unify our deserialization code.
We hopefully put sufficient wild card implementations in place so that old trait bounds imply 
the right trait anyway. For cases where this does not hold true, the following changes may be required:

> `Queryable<ST, DB>` is now equivalent to `FromSqlRow<ST, DB>`. The later is used as actual trait bound 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Queryable<ST, DB>` is now equivalent to `FromSqlRow<ST, DB>`. The latter is used as an actual trait bound 
```

on the corresponding `RunQueryDsl` methods.

> `QueryableByName<DB>` is now equivalent to `FromSqlRow<Untyped, DB>`. The later is used as actual trait 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`QueryableByName<DB>` is now equivalent to `FromSqlRow<Untyped, DB>`. The latter is used as an actual trait 
```

on the corresponding `RunQueryDsl` methods.

### Changed the scope of `QueryFragment` implementations

> With diesel 2.0 we introduced a way to specialise `QueryFragment` implementations for specific backend, while 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Diesel 2.0, we introduced a way to specialise `QueryFragment` implementations for specific backend, while 
```
